---
title: "Getting Data"
teaching: 15
exercises: 0
questions:
- "FIXME"
objectives:
- "Write Python programs to download data sets using simple REST APIs."
keypoints:
- "FIXME"
---

A growing number of organizations make data sets available on the web in a style called [REST](reference.html#rest),
which stands for REpresentational State Transfer.
The details (and ideology) aren't important;
what matters is that when REST is used,
every data set is identified by a URL
and can be accessed through a set of functions
called an [application programming interface](reference.html#api) (API).

For example,
the World Bank's [Climate Data API](http://data.worldbank.org/developers/climate-data-api)
provides data generated by 15 global circulation models.
According to the API's [home page](http://data.worldbank.org/developers/climate-data-api),
the data sets containing yearly averages for various values are identified by URLs of the form:

<code>http://climatedataapi.worldbank.org/climateweb/rest/v1/country/cru/<u><em>var</em></u>/year/<u><em>iso3</em></u>.<u><em>ext</em></u></code>

where:

*   *var* is either `pr` (for precipitation) or `tas` (for "temperature at surface");
*   *iso3* is the International Standards Organization (ISO)
    [3-letter code for a country](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ISO_3166-1_alpha-3),
    such as "CAN" for Canada or "BRA" for Brazil;
    and
*   *ext* (short for "extension") specifies the format we want the data in.
    There are several choices for format,
    but the simplest is [comma-separated values](reference.html#csv) (CSV),
    in which each record is a row,
    and the values in each row are separated by commas.
    (CSV is frequently used for spreadsheet data.)

For example, if we want the average annual temperature in Canada as a CSV file, the URL is:

~~~
http://climatedataapi.worldbank.org/climateweb/rest/v1/country/cru/tas/year/CAN.csv
~~~
{: .source}

If we paste that URL into a browser, it displays:

~~~
year,data
1901,-7.67241907119751
1902,-7.862711429595947
1903,-7.910782814025879
...
2007,-6.819293975830078
2008,-7.2008957862854
2009,-6.997011661529541
~~~
{: .source}

> ## Behind the Scenes
>
> This particular data set might be stored in a file on the World Bank's server,
> or that server might:
>
> 1.  Receive our URL.
> 2.  Break it into pieces.
> 3.  Extract the three key fields (the variable, the country code, and the desired format).
> 4.  Fetch the desired data from a database.
> 5.  Format the data as CSV.
> 6.  Send that to our browser.
>
> As long as the World Bank doesn't change its URLs,
> we don't need to know which method it's using
> and it can switch back and forth between them without breaking our programs.
{: .callout}

If we only wanted to look at data for a couple of countries,
we could just download those files one by one.
But we want to compare data for many different pairs of countries,
so we should write a program.

Python has a library called `urllib2` for working with URLs.
It is clumsy to use, though, so many people (including us) prefer
a newer library called [Requests](http://docs.python-requests.org).
To install it, run the command:

~~~
$ pip install requests
~~~
{: .bash}

> ## Installing with Pip
>
> Note that `pip` is a program in its own right,
> so the command above must be run in the shell,
> and *not* from within Python itself.
{: .callout}

If Requests is not already installed,
`pip`'s output is:

~~~
Downloading/unpacking requests
  Downloading requests-2.7.0-py2.py3-none-any.whl (470kB): 470kB downloaded
Installing collected packages: requests
Successfully installed requests
Cleaning up...
~~~
{: .output}

If it's already present,
the output will be:

~~~
Requirement already satisfied (use --upgrade to upgrade): requests in /Users/swc/anaconda/lib/python2.7/site-packages
Cleaning up...
~~~
{: .output}

Either way,
we can now get the data we want like this:

~~~
import requests
url = 'http://climatedataapi.worldbank.org/climateweb/rest/v1/country/cru/tas/year/CAN.csv'
response = requests.get(url)
if response.status_code != 200:
    print('Failed to get data:', response.status_code)
else:
    print('First 100 characters of data are')
    print(response.text[:100])
~~~
{: .python}
~~~
First 100 characters of data are
year,data
1901,-7.67241907119751
1902,-7.862711429595947
1903,-7.910782814025879
1904,-8.15572929382
~~~
{: .output}

The first line imports the `requests` library.
The second defines the URL for the data we want;
we could just pass this URL as an argument to the `requests.get` call on the third line,
but assigning it to a variable makes it easier to find.

`requests.get` actually gets our data. More specifically, it:

*   creates a connection to the `climatedataapi.worldbank.org` server;
*   sends the URL `/climateweb/rest/v1/country/cru/tas/year/CAN.csv` to that server;
*   creates an object in memory on our computer to hold the response;
*   assigns a number to that object's `status_code` member variable to tell us whether the request succeeded or not; and
*   assigns the data sent back by the web server to the object's `text` member variable.

The server can return many different [status codes](reference.html#http-status-code);
the most common are:

|Code|Name                 |Meaning                                                                   |
|----|---------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------|
|200 |OK                   |The request has succeeded.                                                |
|204 |No Content           |The server has completed the request, but doesn't need to return any data.|
|400 |Bad Request          |The request is badly formatted.                                           |
|401 |Unauthorized         |The request requires authentication.                                      |
|404 |Not Found            |The requested resource could not be found.                                |
|408 |Timeout              |The server gave up waiting for the client.                                |
|418 |I'm a teapot         |No, really...                                                             |
|500 |Internal Server Error|An error occurred in the server.                                          |

200 (OK) is the one we want;
if we get anything else, the response probably doesn't contain actual data
(though it might contain an error message).

> ## Some People Don't Follow the Rules
>
> Unfortunately, some sites don't return a meaningful status code.
> Instead, they return 200 for *everything*,
> then put an error message (if appropriate) in the text of the response.
> This works when the result is being displayed to a human being,
> but fails miserably when the "reader" is a program that can't actually read.
{: .callout}

> ## Defining REST API
>
> A REST API is:
> 1.  A data format.
> 2.  A way of accessing data via an URL.
> 3.  Less work for the server.
> 4.  Only accessable via Python libraries like Requests.
{: .challenge}

> ## Get Data for Guatemala
> 
> Modify the little program above to fetch temperatures for Guatemala.
{: .challenge}

> ## How Hot is Afghanistan?
> 
> Read the [documentation](http://data.worldbank.org/developers/climate-data-api) for the Climate Data API,
> and then write URLs to find the annual average temperature for Afghanistan between 1980 and 1999.
{: .challenge}
